To P. Lentulus Spinther in Cilicia

Whatever attention or affection I may shew you,
although it may seem sufficient in the eyes of others,
can never seem sufficient in my own.
For such has been the magnitude of your services to me that,
inasmuch as you never rested till my affair was brought to a conclusion,
while I cannot effect the same in your cause,
I regard my life as a burden. The difficulties are these.
The king's agent, Hammonius, is openly attacking us by bribery.
The business is being carried out by means of the same money-lenders
as it was when you were in town. Such people as wish it done for the king's sake?
and they are few are all for intrusting the business to Pompey.
The senate supports the trumped-up religious scruple, not from any respect to religion,
but from ill-feeling towards him, and disgust at the king's outrageous bribery.
I never cease advising and instigating Pompey?even frankly finding fault with and
admonishing him to avoid what would be a most discreditable imputation.
But he really leaves no room for either entreaties or admonitions from me.
For, whether in everyday conversation or in the senate, no one could support your
cause with greater eloquence, seriousness, zeal, and energy than he has done,
testifying in the highest terms to your services to himself and his affection for you.
Marcellinus, you know, is incensed with his flute-playing majesty.
In everything, saving and excepting this case of the king, he professes the intention of
being your champion. We take what he gives: nothing can move him from his motion
as to the religious difficulty, which he made up his mind to bring, and has, in fact,
brought several times before the senate. The debate up to the Ides (for I am writing
early in the morning of the Ides) has been as follows: Hortensius and I and Lucullus
voted for yielding to the religious scruple as far as concerned the army, for otherwise
there was no possibility of get ting the matter through, but, in accordance with the decree
already passed on your own motion, were for directing you to restore the king,
"so far as you may do so without detriment to the state": so that while the religious
difficulty prohibits the employment of an army, the senate might still retain you
as the person authorized. Crassus votes for sending three legates, not excluding
Pompey: for he would allow them to be selected even from such as are at present in
possession of imperium. Bibulus is for three legates selected from men without imperium.
The other consulars agree with the latter, except Servilius, who says that he ought
not to be restored at all: and Volcatius, who on the motion of Lupus votes for giving
the business to Pompey: and Afranius, who agrees with Volcatius. This last fact increases
the suspicion as to Pompey's wishes: for it was noticed that Pompey's intimates agreed
with Volcatius. We are in a very great difficulty: the day seems going against us.
The notorious colloguing and eagerness of Libo and Hypsaeus, and the earnestness
displayed by Pompey's intimates, have produced an impression that Pompey desires it;
and those who don't want him to have it are at the same time annoyed with your
having put power into his hands. I have the less influence in the case because I
am under an obligation to you. Moreover, whatever influence I might have had is
extinguished by the idea people entertain as to Pompey's wishes, for they think
they are gratifying him. We are in much the same position as we were long before
your departure: now, as then, the sore has been fomented secretly by the king
himself and by the friends and intimates of Pompey, and then openly irritated
by the consulars, till the popular prejudice has been excited to the highest pitch.
All the world shall recognize my loyalty, and your friends on the spot shall see
my affection for you though you are absent.
If there were any good faith in those most bound to shew it, we should be in no difficulty at all.

Your friend,
Julius Caesar

Original text from: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Letters_to_friends/1.1

